---
title: Basics for beginners
---


### Programming for Stud.IP


Before you start contributing to the development of Stud.IP, you should know what [Stud.IP CoreGroup, StEPs, TICs, Lifters and BIESTs](../rules/introduction) are.


It is also important to adhere to the [coding style](../coding-style) so that the written code can be understood more quickly by other Stud.IP developers. In this context, the [naming conventions](../coding-style#naming-conventions) and the rules for [PHP file formatting](../coding-style#php-file-formatting) are also important.


Here is an outdated [workshop](http://develop.studip.de/studip/download/force_download/0/8217c5e9c3b82ab83e388d8aa2ce339f/studip_programmierung_20111222.pdf) from 2011 by André Noack with a general overview.


### Development system


To develop for Stud.IP you should have a computer with a web server,
at least PHP 7.2, a MySQL database, git and a development
development environment is installed. How all this
is set up is described in [the article on the development environment](./development-environment).


There are also some [commands](./tips-to-get-started) for the Unix shell, which facilitate development in a large software system such as Stud.IP.




### The Stud.IP system


#### Stud.IP "Pages"


In Stud.IP, new pages are not added as PHP scripts, but via the framework [Trails](./trails). In this framework, pages are divided into [Controller](./trails#der-controller), which contain the program logic, and views, which take over the display. They are generated by so-called [Flexi-Templates](./flexi-templates), which are PHP files to which objects and variables from the controller are transferred.


In order to be able to call a controller, it is necessary to add it to the global [Navigation](Navigation). The procedure for attaching differs between controllers in plugins and Stud.IP-internal controllers.


#### Database access


Internally Stud.IP uses PDO to access database tables. These accesses are abstracted via [SORM (SimpleORMap)](./simpleormap). This is a small framework that handles the conversion of database entries into objects.


#### Translation


Stud.IP is available in two languages: German and English. German character strings are used in the source code, which are translated into English using the PHP function `gettext`. The procedure is different for PHP and JavaScript code:


* [in PHP](Howto/Internationalization#internationalization-in-php-code)
* [in JavaScript](Howto/Internationalization#internationalization-injs-code)




#### Plugins


Plugins are an important component of Stud.IP. They can be used to change the way Stud.IP works or to add new functions to Stud.IP.


The following pages provide an introduction to plugin development:


* ['Creating a plugin' by Moritz Strohm (PDF)](https://develop.studip.de/studip/dispatch.php/document/download/5747961f81b385b1520cf7dc393f1db6)
* ['Plugin-Tutorial' by Elmar Ludwig](PluginTutorial)
